last time so we're talking about a set
of real numbers and last time i stated
the following theorem
about the existence and
properties of r that make it special
so the theorem is
there exists
a unique ordered field
with the least upper bound property
containing the rational numbers so
remember
a field was
a set that had
[Music]
operations plus and multiplication
an ordered field
also this set has an order on it
and this order
interacts with
the operations of addition and
multiplication in natural ways and the
least upper bound property means
every
non-empty subset which is bounded above
has a supremum in
uh
in the set
so the least upper bound property
meaning the supremum belongs in r not
necessarily in the non-empty set which
is bounded above
and we saw last time that q the rational
numbers does not have this property but
looking at that set uh q positive
rational q squared less than two
that set was bounded above but didn't
have a supremum in irrational numbers
because the square root of 2
essentially is not a rational number
and the square root of 2 would be the
supreme
okay so just based on this theorem which
characterizes
and constructs r the set of real numbers
we're now going to prove
facts about real numbers
and soon turn to limits
so as i said in the beginning limits is
are are the central object of study
in analysis that's what analysis is the
study of limits the real
analysis part or the real and that is
that we're doing this within the setting
of the real numbers
okay
so
now let me just point out something kind
of simple about the real numbers
so
i mean extremely simple fact about the
real numbers is
it's not discrete like the integers are
so for the integers if i take one
integer and another it's not necessarily
the case that there's an integer
strictly in between them there's not an
integer between 0 and 1.
and
but r does satisfy this property
essentially because
it's a field so
and it's an ordered field so
what's the simple fact
if x
y
are real numbers
and x is less than y
then there exists a real number r little
r
so that
x is less than r
is less than y
and i can give you r explicitly r is
equal to
x plus y over 2.
okay
all right that's not so surprising
now this
statement here is also true if i replace
r with rational numbers namely if
i have two rational numbers one less
than the other then there's just a
rational number in between
uh that's between x and y right i just
again define r in this way now a natural
question
is the following
is that if x and y
are in r
and
x is less than y
then
does there i'll put a question mark over
that does there exist
an r and q
such that
x is less than r is less than y
okay i can't necessarily define r by
this formula here and guarantee that
r will
be rational so for example
if x equals root 2
and
say y equals 2 root 2
then x plus y over 2
equals 3 halves
root 2
which is
not a rational number because if it were
a rational number then i could multiply
2 through by 2 3 and say square root of
2 is a rational number so
all of that to say
that simply by doing this trick of just
taking the average does not necessarily
mean that if i take two real numbers one
less than the other then there exists a
rational in between them
um that's not so clear to see
but this is one of the most
this is one of the basic facts about r
is that the answer to this question is
yes
and that the in some sense the rational
numbers are
dense in the real numbers for any two
real numbers i can find a rational in
between them okay
it's uh the first
main property of the rational of the
real numbers will prove
and it'll be a consequence of
a second property we'll prove
which is called the archamidian property
so
theorems has two parts this first is
called
archimedean property
of r
and the statement of this is
if x and y
are in r
and x is positive
then there exists
a natural number n
such that
n x
is bigger than y
okay and then the second part of this
theorem is the statement that
the rationals are dense that the answer
to this question is yes
so
this usually goes by the name of the
density of the rationals
so it states that if
x and y are in r
and x is less than y
then
there exists
rational number little r
such that x is less than r is less than
y
okay um
so let's prove the first theorem
the first part of this theorem the
archimedean property
so
what do we have to use
to prove this theorem
just what we know about the real numbers
the fact that it's an ordered field with
the least upper bound property you'll
see how this least upper bound property
plays a major role in
kind of
all of these elementary things we prove
about r
okay so
let's
restate our hypothesis so suppose x and
y are in
r
and x is less than
x is bigger than zero
so we wish to show
so just restating this inequality here
we wish to show
show the word show you you should read
as synonymous with proof
that
there exists a natural number n
such that n is bigger than
y over x
okay that's just restating that so we're
going to prove this by contradiction um
so the proof will go by
contradiction
all right so
this is again this is our hypothesis
which we will assume throughout the
proof the thing we're trying to prove is
this statement here the second sentence
so this is the thing that we will
negate we will not negate uh the
hypothesis we're negating what we want
to prove in the end and then uh arriving
at a false statement therefore showing
um our conclusion
is true so
um
okay so we assume that the second
statement is false
again we're assuming the first statement
so
suppose not ie
we're all in a natural number
uh
and is less than or equal to
y over x right that's the negation of
uh the f of there exists a integer
that's bigger than y over x
okay so then that means
then the natural numbers as a subset
of the real numbers
is bounded above
now
the set of natural numbers is a
non-empty subset of r which is bounded
above therefore it has a supremum
so by
the least upper bound property
of r
and has
a supremum
call it a
in r
okay
so
since a
is
the supremum of n
anything smaller than a cannot be an
upper bound for the natural numbers okay
because remember a is supposed to be the
least upper bound anything smaller than
that
cannot be an upper bound for the natural
numbers
is not
an
upper bound
for n
but what does that mean
so if a minus 1 is not an upper bound
for n that means there must exist some
integer in n which is strictly bigger
than a minus 1.
there exists a natural number i'll call
it m
such that
a minus 1
is less than m
but then this implies
that a
is less than m plus 1
which implies that a
is not an upper bound
for the natural numbers because n plus 1
m's an integer a natural number so n
plus 1 is a natural number and i've just
found a natural number bigger than a
that means a can't be an upper bound for
the natural numbers but
and therefore a does not equal
the soup of n and this is
a contradiction because we
um
because a is defined as a soup of n
right
so from the assumption just to recap
just from the assumption that
um
for all natural numbers n n is less than
or equal to y over x
uh we concluded that it has a supremum
that's not its suprema okay so that's a
false statement and therefore our
initial
assumption
that
for all natural numbers in
n is less than or equal to y over x that
must be false and therefore there exists
an n
which is bigger than y over x
which is what we wanted to prove
okay
all right so
for the second
proof of the second theorem the density
of uh
rational numbers we'll do
so we have three cases to consider
so
suppose
x and y are real numbers
x is less than y
there are
three cases
call it a
x is less than 0 is less than y
b
0 is bigger than or equal to x is less
than y
you can see
x is less than y is less than or equal
to 0. okay
so we want to find a rational number
between x and y so for this case this is
pretty simple we just take r to be zero
so i'm not going to say anything about
case a
all right
i'm just going to move on to case b
okay
okay so
case b
so suppose
x is bigger than or equal to zero and
less than y
then
by
ap i'll refer to
so that'll that'll
be shorthand notation for the
archimedean property so part one which
we've already proven is true
by the archimedean property
there exists a natural number in
such that n times y minus x
is bigger than one
okay
um
now
we're going to use the archimedean
property again
there exists an integer l
and a natural number l
such that
l is bigger than n times x
okay
thus
the set
of all integers of natural numbers k
such that k is bigger than
an x
is non-empty
okay
so this is a subset of the natural
numbers so it has a least element
by the well ordering property
of the natural numbers
s has
the least element
m
okay now what does this mean
what does m have to satisfy what we're
going to show
is that m over n
is in fact um a rational number
that is between x and y
okay so the goal is i guess
so let me just uh
make a comment here
so once we've made uh once we found this
natural number little n
um
so that n times y minus x is bigger than
one what does this mean this means n
times y
is bigger than
n x plus one
so
our goal is then to find
so this stuff in in brackets you should
not consider as part of the proof this
is me trying to explain to you um
you know where
from here we would like to go to
conclude the proof that there exists a
rational number between y and x
so we have this inequality the
archamidian property tells us there's a
natural number that satisfies this
so what we would like to do is find
another natural number and i'm
foreshadowing what's to come
a natural number m well let's not uh i
don't want you to give you any false
hopes i mean they're not false it'll
happen in a minute but let's
call this j
so that two things happen um
n times x is less than
j
and
j is less than
uh
or equal to
and x plus 1. so if we're able to find
such an integer j satisfying this
these two inequalities then
from this inequality we would get that
n y is bigger than
or
this is bigger than n x
plus one which is bigger than or equal
to j
which is bigger than
nx
ie so let me just rewrite this in x is
less than j is less than
n times y or in other words
x is less than j over n
is less than y and here's our rational
number
which we would choose
okay
so
that's the game plan which maybe i
should have said
right after i came up with this integer
little n
you may be asking why come up with this
integer little n well
we have to start somewhere in the
archmedian property gives us this and
this somehow gives us a scale to
at least a
scale one over n to kind of work on
um but anyway so going back to the proof
um
so we have by the well ordering property
of the natural numbers this set s
which is the set of all natural numbers
so that k is bigger than n x
has a least element little m
now
m
uh
so s has a least element m means m is in
s so
since m is an s
this means simply by the definition of
what s is
in x is less than m
that's very good
that's one of the properties we wanted i
wrote it as j but we wanted an integer
to satisfy
since m is
the least element of
of s
m minus 1 is not an s
okay
so that implies that n minus 1 not in x
means in s means
m minus 1 is less than or equal to n
times x
i e
m is less than or equal to n times x
plus one
now we'll combine
these two inequalities along with the
first one involving n times one uh times
y minus x so i'm just basically
rewriting what i told you our goal was
here in this uh bracket
um
then
n times x is less than m
and this is less than or equal to n
times x plus 1
which by our definition of n
and the first inequality we have up
there involving y is less than n times y
so we have nx is less than m is less
than ny
so that means x is less than
m over n is less than y
so
r equals m over n
which is a
proportion of
natural numbers
is
uh
our choice that's an awkward way to
finish the sentence but um my mind went
blank anyways so okay that handles the
case b
right that x is bigger than or equal to
zero
okay
um so one small uh
thing that i
just a very minor comment if you've got
all this and and you understand it
that's fine but you may be asking since
i never actually said it out loud where
did i use the fact that x is bigger than
or equal to zero
so
so where i use that so let's just assume
x is bigger than zero so what
where did i use um
is
really write um
in this place here so i don't want to
spend too much time on that but um
by being able to claim that m minus 1 is
not an s
okay um
all right so what about case
c
so in case
c will just reduce to case b
okay
suppose
x is less than y which is less than or
equal to 0.
then
0 is bigger than or equal to minus y
which is bigger than minus x
so
by case
b
there exists
a rational number
our tilde
such that
minus y is less than our tilde is less
than
minus x
okay
um then
this implies that
x is less than minus r tilde is less
than y
so
r equal to minus r tilde
does the job
so that proves the theorem
so we'll use this in just a minute to
prove a simple
statement about
soups about
soups and imps
but
before i use it let me
go on and what i'd like to do is state
um
a different way
to
verify that
a number is the soup of a set or the m
of a set so i'm just going to state it
for
soups and there's an analogous statement
for imps so the theorem is this
and this will actually be on the
assignment so
assume s is a subset of r
is
on empty
and bound it above
so s has the supremum
so i'm going to tell you what the
supremum satisfies and it's an if and
only if statement
then
some number x equals a soup of s
if and only if so either i'll do a
double arrow or i'll write if and only
if iff
two conditions are satisfied the first
is that
x is
an upper bound for s
and the second
so at one point or very in the very near
future we're going to be seeing epsilons
and deltas so i'll state it this way
so you should
start seeing them now for every epsilon
positive
there exists
an element y in s
such that
x minus epsilon is less than y
is less than or equal to x
okay
so why is this
you know why why
why should this be the case well
if
s is
all over here to the left of x
then and if i take something smaller
so i'm actually kind of giving you a
picture proof of one direction
and
so if i take something smaller x minus
epsilon then this cannot be an upper
bound for s
so therefore there must exist
some y and s bigger than x minus epsilon
and it's less than or equal to x because
x is an upper bound for s so
in fact this picture
is a proof of this direction namely if x
is a the supremum of s
then
uh these two conditions are satisfied
and then on the assignment i'll have you
prove the other direction basically
that these two conditions imply that a
real number is
the supremum of s
okay
all right so
let's use the serum
and our comedian property to prove a
simple statement about
the soup of a simple set
so i should so let me also write here
that i'm not going to state it as a
theorem but i'll just this is a remark
meaning
um
i'm being a little bit loose with what
i'm writing down but it's true
x equals m s
so for s a non-empty
subset which is bounded below
there's
an analogous characterization as
x is a
lower bound for s
and
we're all epsilon positive
there exists a y in s
so that
x is less than or equal to y is less
than x plus epsilon
okay so this is the analogous statement
for the m
for something to be the answer
so
um okay so this is a i guess you could
call it a theorem it's not a very
spectacular theorem but
if i look at the set 1 minus 1 over n
in a natural number and i take its soup
this is equal to one
okay
so this shouldn't surprise you too much
because what is this set um
this is the set
zero one-half
two-thirds
three-fourths
four-fifths
and so on so you see one is always
bigger than or equal to everything in
here so it's certainly an upper bound
and everything is kind of progressively
getting closer to one so it should
satisfy the second property namely if i
go a little bit to the left of one then
i'll be able to find
something less than or equal to one and
bigger than that thing
to the left of one and that'll be how we
prove
this theorem
so
first off
since 1 minus 1 over n is less than 1
for all natural numbers in
this implies
one is
an upper bound for this set
now we're going to uh verify
that 1 satisfies that second property of
the theorem that for every epsilon
positive i can find a natural number
uh
little n so that 1 minus 1 over n
is bigger than 1 minus epsilon
okay and we'll use archimedean property
for that
okay um
so if you're ever supposed to show
something for every epsilon positive
then
uh
every proof should start off with let
epsilon be positive in fact i'll give
you a couple of points on the exam if
there's epsilon
delta m's whatever proofs
which means you should prove something
for all epsilon i'll give you a couple
of points on the exam
if you just at least state let epsilon
be positive so
let epsilon be positive
okay
so then
there exist
so by the archimedean property
there exists a natural number in
such that
1 over epsilon is less than n
okay this is taking for example in
the statement of the archimedean
property if you'd like it's taking x to
be 1
and y to be one over epsilon
okay
then
one minus
one over n
let's go
let's do it this way
and one minus epsilon
is
so since
epsilon is less than
one over epsilon is less than n
this is equivalent to saying one over n
is less than epsilon
and therefore
minus epsilon is less than minus 1 over
n
so then 1 minus epsilon is less than 1
minus 1 over n which is
as we have up here is less than 1.
thus there exists a natural number in
so that
so
okay that went kind of quick so what i
did was i found a natural number n which
is bigger than one over epsilon and from
now on typically i won't state it like
this i'll state it more like this
um which you know this
follows from this
um so when i make a statement like
choose a natural number so that one over
n is less than epsilon um
that follows from the archimedean
property just by taking one over this
inequality
okay and so from there we concluded that
one minus epsilon is less than one minus
one over n which is still less than one
and therefore
um
we have proven the second number two
property of
one
and thus by the theorem one is equal to
the supremum of this set
okay
so let's get a little more
familiarity with uh
using this uh using soups and imps and
in particular using that theorem which i
stated right there about uh this
characterization of the soup as being an
upper bound and satisfying the second
property that for
every epsilon positive you can find
something in the set which is bigger
than
x minus epsilon
so to do that let's look at a couple of
different sets
um
types of subsets of real numbers so for
x uh
a real number
and a a subset
we define
two sets
x plus a this is just the shift of a by
x so this is the set of all elements of
the form
x plus little a
where little a's and capital a
and x times a this is the set of all
elements of the form
x times a
where a is in
capital a so from now on basically
towards the end until almost the end of
the course we're working as in subsets
of the real numbers okay so these things
are meaningful
plus and multiplication
so
we have the following theorem
so let's let's uh
let me state the assumptions and then
we'll probably guess the conclusions
if x is a real number
and a is
bounded above
then the conclusion is
x plus a
is bounded above
and the supremum of this set
x plus a is equal to x plus
the supremum of a
you know we should be able to kind of
guess this because let's assume
you know
a is
this interval here
uh
that would make
the soup a
this let's say right endpoint of this
interval then when i shift everything by
x
then
this point soup a shifts to x plus soup
a
which should be the supremum of x plus
capital a
okay so this is not too
surprising
you know there are surprising theorems
in analysis we already saw one um
at least
i thought it was surprising hopefully
you found it surprising um
about the cardinality of the power set
compared to the cardinality of the
original set
um
you come up with this strange looking
or the proof of that
remember you came up with this strange
looking set which you kind of had to
which in the end basically referenced
itself
in its definition
which led to
you know the conclusion we wanted
okay but this one is not so scary this
this one you should be able this theorem
you should be able to believe
and maybe even prove without me telling
you how to
if not that's fine too
the other
statement is that if x is positive
and a is
bounded above
then
x plus a or x times a sorry
is bounded above
and
soup of x times a
equals x times
the soup of a
okay
and again so if i were to draw a picture
and let's say
a is kind of symmetric with respect to 0
so
here's a
there's
soup of a and i multiply it by x
then this kind of either fattens the
interval or makes it smaller
so let's say i made it smaller now to x
times a
then
x times soup of a would be the supremum
of this set
why x positive well
the reason is because if i multiply by x
negative this not only shrinks it but it
flips things so in fact there's a
statement in the book about if x is
negative
then
here you would need to assume a is
bounded below
so the corresponding statement for x
negative is if x is less than 0 and a is
bounded below
then x times a is bounded above
because multiplying by something
negative flips inequalities
and the soup of x times a
is equal to minus
x times the inf of a
okay
or there's no minus this should be soup
of x times a is equal to x times the imp
of a
okay
all right so let's prove um
these two theorems
[Applause]
using um
using this previous theorem that i
stated without proof but you'll prove in
the assignment about how to characterize
supes of sets as upper bounds and
satisfying this epsilon property
um
okay
so
so let me just restate our assumptions
so suppose x is r
and
a is bounded above
then the number super
exist in r
because r has the least upper bound
property a is a non-empty subset
uh so i should have said that in the so
all of this is
for a non-empty subset of a so that i'm
talking about something
so i have a non-empty subset which is
bounded above by the least upper bound
property the supremum of a exists in r
so now i'm going to show that
x times the soup of a satisfies that's
an it's an upper bound for x times a
then for all
a in a since
soup a is an upper bound for capital a
little a is less than or equal to
soup a
which implies that
for all a and capital a if i multiply
through by x
i mean if i add x to both sides
x
plus
little a is less than or equal to x plus
soup of a
which implies that x plus
super of a
is
an upper bound
for the set
x plus a
okay
so that's the first property we wanted
to prove of x plus soup a
now we'll prove the second property
this epsilon property let epsilon be
positive
then
by the previous theorem
there exists
a y in a
such that
suit minus a is less than epsilon is
less than y is less than or equal to
soup a
right this is just
from the fact that the supremum of a
satisfies those two conditions up there
okay
now i just add x through all of these
inequalities
which implies there exists a y
and a
such that
x plus super a
minus epsilon is less than
x plus y which is less than
or equal to x plus
soup of a
okay
and
that proves the second property because
what have i done i found
for every epsilon positive an element of
the set x plus a
so i'll even i'll restate this
which implies there exists
an element z in the set x plus capital a
namely x plus y
so that
x plus soup a
minus epsilon is less than z is less
than or equal to
x plus
soup a
all right and that's the second uh
property which we wanted to prove this
epsilon property uh now we've proven it
for x plus soup a
uh for the set x plus a
thus
soup of x plus a
equals x plus
soup a
okay
so
uh we proved that x plus soup a is the
supremum of x plus a by showing it was
an upper bound and it satisfied uh this
epsilon
property
i mean it's essentially the same proof
for
x times capital a
you just replace
pluses with multiplication
[Applause]
so in fact
i'm running a little short on time
it gets a little slow moving today
so i will not
go through
actually write the proof of
the second part simply because
the same logic works
only now i replace everything by
multiplication by x instead of addition
by x
well almost
okay why not let's go through the proof
real quick
i just won't spend as much time
explaining
uh stuff so now we want to do
um
we want to show x times
um soup a is the supremum of x times a
so suppose x is positive
a is bounded
above
then
soup a again exists in r because a is
bounded above
and because soup a is an upper bound for
capital a
then for all a and capital a
a is less than or equal to
soup a which implies that
for all a and capital a
x times little a is less than or equal
to
x times soup a
which implies that x times soup a
is
an upper bound
for x times a
okay so we've proven that x times soup a
is an upper bound for the set x times a
we now want to verify this epsilon
property for x times soup a with respect
to the set x times a
okay
so
let epsilon be positive
and i'm going to put in brackets again
what we want to do what we want to
define
we want to show
there exists a z in x times a
so that
x
times soup a
minus epsilon is less than z
c is always less than or equal to x
times soup a since we've proven x times
soup as an upper bound for this set so
i'm not going to
keep writing the second inequality
okay
so this is what we want to prove
we haven't proven it yet so let epsilon
be positive then
just as
we did in the plus case
then
there exists an element y in a
such that
soup a minus
now here we're going to choose y not
exactly for epsilon here
remember the statement for number 2
holds
for soup a for every epsilon in
particular i can choose
anything i want here
and find a y
in between soup a minus whatever i want
here which is positive in soup a
so instead of putting epsilon here like
i did before
i'm going to put epsilon over x which i
can do because x is positive
which means epsilon over x is some
positive number
okay
now
why did i choose epsilon over x
because magic happens
then
that means there exists a y in a
such that
if i multiply
through by x
i get x times soup
a minus epsilon is less than x times y
is less than so i'm going to stop
writing this inequality because this is
always true because x times soup a is
bigger than or equal to x times y
which implies there exists a z
in x times a
namely
z equals x times y where y is from here
such that
x times soup a
minus epsilon is less than z
and therefore x times
soup a
satisfies the second epsilon property
with respect to s given by x times a
and that's the end okay
so
you see that uh
i wanted this in the end so i chose y to
give me this slightly
different thing for epsilon over x
because in the end i would multiply
through by x
and i wanted this
okay
we do proofs for
limits
uh you'll see we we're always trying to
make something less than epsilon so
quite often we'll have to choose
something to be less than epsilon over 5
or epsilon over some number
for everything to work out in the end
just like we did here so that's kind of
a preview of things to come
okay
and one last
kind of simple theorem about soups and
imps this really doesn't use that
theorem but just basically what the
definition of
soups and imps are
namely that
if a
and b
are subsets of r
and for all
let's say
with a
rounded above
b
found it below
and
for all x y
so for all x and
a
and for all y
and b
x is less than or equal to y
then
soup of a is less than or equal to
the infant b okay so picture wise
here's a everything here sits below
everything in b so b has to be over here
and therefore the soup of a which is
there
has to be less than or equal to the inf
b which is there that's the picture that
goes along with this all right but how
do we actually prove this i mean we have
to use
the definitions pictures do not suffice
although they inform us they they don't
suffice
so
this is quite simple
um
so i'm not gonna rewrite the hypotheses
now because uh
take a little bit but
um so
so if
all x and
let me
basically what we're going to do is
we're going to take
uh
a soup and then an imph all right so
at y being b
then
for all x and a
x is less than or equal to y
which implies y
[Applause]
is an upper bound
or a
and therefore
uh the soup a the
supremum of a which is the least upper
bound has to be
smaller than or equal to y
thus we've proven
for all y
and b
soup a is less than or equal to y
which implies that
soup a
is
a lower bound
for b
and by that same logic a minute ago so
remember the the infimum of b is the
greatest lower bound so if i take any
lower bound of b
it has to be less than or equal to the m
b
so which implies soup a is less than or
equal to
b
[Applause]
okay
so
uh we're starting to close out here our
discussion of or at least our
discussion of the elementary properties
of the real numbers so let me say just a
couple of things about the absolute
value
okay and let me recall how this is
defined
uh
at least this is how it should have been
defined from your calculus class
if x is in r we define the absolute
value of x this is either
x
if x is bigger than or equal to 0
or minus x
if x is less than or equal to 0
note that these two things agree when x
is zero so that i'm not defining the
absolute value of x to be
two different things when x equals zero
so
um
and you know what is this
uh
really kind of meant to
be it's supposed to be
kind of it's supposed to measure the
distance from
uh
or it's supposed to
represent i shouldn't say uh
you know is the distance because i
haven't told you what a distance means
but what is what is it supposed to
represent it's supposed to represent the
distance
uh from x to zero
um
uh
which is
you know why it's always non-negative i
mean if i have
x was over here
and
this distance is meant to be absolute
value of x
that y
okay
so in fact that's the first thing that
uh so i'm just gonna prove uh some very
simple properties of the absolute value
i mean again these properties should not
be surprising to you you should know all
of them
um
but we're trying to get familiar uh
familiar
that's a tough word to say
familiarities
or familiarity with proofs
um
so i'm gonna do as many proofs uh as i
can for you so
the first statement is
for all x and r
absolute value of x is bigger than zero
bigger than or equal to zero
and
the absolute value equals 0
if and only if x equals 0.
okay
the second property is that for all
x and r
the absolute value of x equals the
absolute value of minus x
for all x y and r
if i
take the
absolute value of the product this is
equal to the product of the absolute
values
for all x and r the absolute value of x
squared
equals
absolute value of x
squared
the fifth property is if x and y is in
r
then
x is less than or equal to y
if
and only if
minus y is less than or equal to x is
less than or equal to y
and the sixth property
that we'll prove
is that
for all x and r
x is less than or equal to its absolute
value
okay
so again these are not too surprising
um
but we'll go through the proofs
because that's the point of this class
um
later on in life you'll come across some
more interesting theorems and then
definitely this one um
okay so
if so we're going to prove this first
statement that if x is in r the absolute
value of x is bigger than or equal to 0.
so
if x is bigger than or equal to zero
then the absolute value of x is by
definition equal to x which is bigger
than or equal to zero
if x is less than or equal to zero
then the absolute then
minus x is bigger than or equal to zero
and by the definition of the absolute
value the absolute value of x is equal
to minus x
which is bigger than or equal to zero so
that's proven that the absolute value of
x is always bigger than or equal to zero
so now let's prove this statement
absolute value of x equals zero if and
only if x equals zero
so when you see an if and only if or two
arrows here that means there's two
statements you need to prove that this
implies this and this implies this
so let's start with
this direction
usually if and only if there's an easy
direction
if x equals 0 then
this is clear simply from the definition
right then absolute value of x equals x
equals 0.
let's go with
the
other direction so
suppose the absolute value of x
equals zero
and if x is bigger than or equal to zero
we get that x is equal to its absolute
value of x is equal to 0.
if x is less than or equal to 0
then
minus x is equal to
its absolute value of x
which equals to zero or
x equals zero so
assuming the absolute value of x is zero
we've proven that x equals zero in both
cases
all right so that proves the the first
property
[Applause]
okay so now we're on to proving uh
number two
for all x and r the absolute value of x
equals minus x so
we'll do that by again we have to
consider two cases x is non-negative or
x is
non-positive so
if x is bigger than or equal to zero
then minus x is less than or equal to
zero
which implies that the absolute value of
minus x equals minus
minus x which equals x which equals
the absolute value of x since we're in
the case that x is not negative
if x is less than or equal to 0
and minus x is bigger than or equal to 0
which implies that
the absolute value of minus x
is equal to
minus x which is
since x is less than or equal to 0 and
by the definition of the absolute value
equal to
the absolute value of x so that proves
2.
okay so for all x y uh real number x the
absolute value of x times y
is equal to the absolute value of x
times absolute value of y
so we need to consider two cases one of
them is
both of them are non-negative
both of them are non-positive
and
both of them are
or one of them is positive one is one of
them is
non-negative
or one of them is non-negative one of
them is non-positive
so
if x is bigger than or equal to zero
and y is bigger than or equal to 0
and x times y is bigger than or equal to
0 which implies x
the absolute value of x
times y is equal to x times y
and since x is non-negative that's equal
to its absolute value since y is
non-negative that's equal to its
absolute value
okay
if x is
bigger than or equal to zero
y is less than or equal to zero
and
minus x times y
is bigger than or equal to zero
implies that the absolute value of x
times y
is equal to
so i should say
let's write it this way
this is equal to minus x
y which is equal to x times
minus y and since y is negative minus y
is equal to its absolute value and since
x is non-negative x is equal to its
absolute value so this is equal to
that okay
another piece of chalk
now the case that
so
you might be thinking about what about x
negative and y non-negative so y y
bigger than or equal to 0 x less than or
equal to 0 it's the same proof just
exchange x and y so i'm not going to do
that case
and
if x is less than or equal to zero
y is less than or equal to zero
and this implies that
minus x is bigger than or equal to zero
and
minus y is bigger than or equal to zero
which by this first case which we've
proven now apply to minus x and minus y
i get that the absolute value of minus x
times minus y
which is equal to x times y
so minus x times minus y is equal to x
times y this is equal to the absolute
value of
minus x times the absolute value of
minus y
and by number two
which we've already proven which is that
the absolute value of minus a number is
equal to the absolute value of the
number again
we get that
okay
so that's three
and for four this is just a special case
of three
take y equals x
and three
now for number five
um
it's an if and only if so we need to
prove
two
uh directions namely willow soup
we'll assume this and then prove this
and then assume this and then prove that
so suppose so this is the
this direction meaning suppose our
assumption is going to be suppose the
absolute value of x
is less than or equal to y
so then
x is bigger than or equal to 0
then this means that
so
if the absolute value of x is less than
or equal to y that automatically tells
you y is not negative
so therefore
minus y is less than or equal to 0
which is less than or equal to x which
equals the absolute value of x which is
less than or equal to y
ie
minus y is less than or equal to x is
less than or equal to
y
so in the other case that x is less than
or equal to 0.
i can apply
basically this part which i've already
proven
and minus x is bigger than or equal to 0
and
the absolute value of minus x which is
equal to the absolute value of x
is less than or equal to y
which implies by this first case i've
proven applied now to minus x
here
that minus y is less than or equal to
minus x is less than or equal to y
and
multiplying through by -1 flips all the
inequalities
uh and also flips the sign which
basically means it leaves this
inequality unchanged if i
replace this by x so multiply through by
-1 flips the inequalities
and proves what we want to do um so
in either case so for the first case we
actually
wrote down a proof and we reduced the
second case x negative
uh to the first case that we've already
proven okay so we've proven that this
uh inequality the absolute value of x
less than or equal to y
implies that um
uh this
so now we need to prove the converse
direction
[Applause]
so the converse direction
okay
so
suppose minus y is less than or
less than or equal to x is less than or
equal to y and i want to prove the
absolute value of x is
less than or equal to
y
so
if x is bigger than or equal to 0
then the absolute value of x is equal to
x which by this inequality
is less than or equal to y
if x is less than or equal to 0
then
minus y is less than or equal to x
implies that
minus x is less than or equal to y
and because
x is negative
minus x is equal to its absolute value
and therefore we've proven the absolute
value of x is less than or equal to y
okay
so
uh we've proven number five
and number six
so
uh for number six what do we do we just
take y equals the absolute value of x
5 to conclude that
x is less than or equal to the absolute
value of x
and bigger than or equal to minus the
absolute value of x okay
that's the proof
okay
now
i'm going to prove one last theorem so
this one is actually very important
about the absolute value it's probably
um
so this inequality is is one of the one
of the most important
tools in all of analysis and you get to
see it right here in your first analysis
class
there's two
basically two other
things will prove at some at one point
which i don't know
are the two other most important things
in analysis this is the triangle
inequality
and the other two are
integration by parts
and change of variables those three
things
fuel
the analysis machine so this theorem so
this is the triangle inequality
and it states for all
x y and r
the absolute value of x plus y is less
than or equal to the absolute value of x
plus the absolute value of y why is it
called the triangle inequality well
let's try to think so although x and y
are
elements of
the real number line let's instead try
and think of these as two
vectors instead
so
so here's the vector x and then
let's say
so
actually i'm running out of time so
okay so i think we'll we'll stop
stop here